# Recommendation_rotten_tomatoes
Recommendation system built on data scraped from Rotten Tomatoes

**Executive Summary**

Over the last decade, most of the world's biggest entertainment and
telecom have moved enormous attention to the new battlefield of
streaming entertainment. From Statista's report of *Frequency of
streaming movies in the U.S. 2019-2020* (Watson, 2020), there are a
total of 25 percent of adults who aged between 18 and 29 years old and a
total of 9 percent of adults who aged above the age of 65 years old
claimed that they watched movies every day. In response, there are more
than 750 movies released in the United States and Canada in 2018 and
2019 (Watson, 2020). This growth of online movie consumption has brought
a tremendous amount of information and choices to consumers and requires
a better movie recommendation system to help consumers find the right
movies they want. In general, content-based and collaborative Filtering
recommendation system are the two most popular approaches. 

 

Content-based and collaborative filtering recommendation both rely on
the item-user interaction. Beside using users' interactions and
feedbacks, the content-based recommendation also requires rich
information of features of the movie to find new movies that are similar
to what the user has watched and liked in the past. On the other hand,
collaborative filtering recommendation requires a good amount of users'
information that helps find similar users and create a recommendation
list based on what a similar user enjoyed. 

 

However, both recommendation systems have to face three problems that
are: cannot recommend fresh items, cold start problem, and lack of side
features for the query. In this project, we present a new approach to
designing a new content-based recommender system to overcome these
problems.

**Problem Definition & Significance**

Entertainment plays a very big role in ensuring that people live normal
and happy lives. Movies are considered as an important art form and
major source of entertainment. There are three problems we try to solve
in this project.

1.  **Cannot recommend fresh items**. This problem is caused by
    overspecialization that means recommendation system limits the list
    of movies based on user's watched list and feedbacks and can't
    recommend items that user and other similar users haven't seen
    before. 

2.  **Cold start problem**. Content based and collaborative filtering
    recommendation rely on users' information so that those
    two recommendation systems can't generate suggestions if there are
    not enough user's information. 

3.  **Lack of side features and cannot query without using movies** Commonly, recommendation system includes the features
    of film name, film ID and other official information, for example,
    the movie name, genre, PG rating, length of movie and release
    year. Side features are any features beyond film name and film ID. 

In this project, our goal is to build a new content-based recommendation
to solve these problems by bringing in more features from critics' and
audiences' reviews and not rely on user historical performances. During
the pandemic, the whole world is streaming more than ever, and daily
consumption of movies increase marginally among U.S. (Alexander,
2020). We believe there will be a good amount demands for a better movie
recommendation system.  

**Prior Literature**

There are several similar research focuses on creating better movie
recommendation systems that can generate personalized
recommendation-content and overcome the problems of cannot recommend
fresh items, cold start problem, lack of side features and cannot query
without using film's name. A popular method to achieve these goals is to
use direct impact, which includes user's rating, like, and share, and
indirect impact, which includes user history, to create Apriori. Then
using maximum entropy principle and LDA to find semantic relation and
create a recommendation list of every given movie.

In order to bring in new features that represent the real feeling of
audiences when they watch the movie, some research propose an approach
of movie review mining and summarization that identifies the words of
feature and opinion from the reviews and pairs feature with opinion to
produce a summary of review. Then add those feature-opinion pairs into
movie's feature list. This approach can help solve issue of cannot
recommend fresh items that could enable recommendation system find new
related fresh movie for users.

To improve performance, content-based recommendation with weights is
also commonly used. Some research proposes a multi-knowledge-based
approach to link the movie to different feature and predict possible
link to other movies. Meanwhile, user's viewing history of each movie
are converted to an implicit rating. In order to filter low quality user
and generate quality recommendation, some research compute a feature
weight based on user's watching habit and user's past rating for each
movie. The recommended movie list is sorted according to the weighted
ratings of each movie.

**Data Source & Preparation**

There are multiple online movie review websites available. We get
numerous results for a movie review from google search engine, but it's
hard to find a website with steady results. We have chosen the website
Rotten Tomatoes to scrape the movie data as it is the most popular
website. Rotten Tomatoes
[https://www.rottentomatoes.com](https://www.rottentomatoes.com/) is an
American review-aggregation website for film and television. The company
was launched in August 1998 by three undergraduate students at the
University of California, Berkeley: Senh Duong, Patrick Y. Lee, and
Stephen Wang. In rotten tomatoes, reviews are taken from a large number
of regional and national film critics.

 

The data was scraped using beautiful soup. We scraped data of around
10,000 movies with the following attributes: Movie Name, Director,
Rating, Rating in words, Top 5 celebrities, Critic Score, Audience
Score, Critic Consensus, Runtime, Studio, Genre, Release Date. Most of
the columns were directly scraped from the data but two columns Rating
in words and release year were derived from columns 'Rating' and 'In
theatre' date respectively. The columns' Critic Score, Audience Score,
Runtime, and Release date had a lot of information which in turn will
create many features and increase sparsity. To avoid this, we have
created bins and categorized the data into a few categories.

 

The text data was then cleaned and preprocessed for analysis. The
process involved removing punctuation and stop words, replacing null
values, deleting duplicates based on the movie name, lemmatizing, and
stemming. Figure1 shows the generated corpus of the data.

![A picture containing table Description automatically
generated](media/image1.png){width="6.207919947506562in"
height="2.5945931758530185in"}

Figure1: cleaned corpus of data

**Text Analytics Workflow**
===========================

Once the data is scraped from Rotten Tomatoes, we made sure that we
don't have duplicate movies data and performed preprocessing and data
cleaning. Later, the extracted features are explored and visualized. To
build a content-based recommendation system we chose to combine features
and calculate the cosine similarity. Later, Similarity score analysis
was performed to identify the unique top 10 movies.

Fig 2: Flow chart of the process

**Exploratory Data Analysis & Visualizations**
----------------------------------

**Ratings and Genre Distribution**

To get better insights of the data we performed exploratory data
analysis before building the model. We worked on finding answers to the
following questions:

-   Number of Ratings and Genres

-   Number of movies per Director

-   Comparing audience score with critic score

-   Ratings for Release year brackets

-   Runtime trend over Release years

![Chart, pie chart Description automatically
generated](media/image2.png)

Movies are given ratings by audiences and

critics to rate the film's suitability for certain audiences based on
its content. Figure 3 explains the distribution of ratings in our
dataset. Our dataset had more than 50% of movies with rating R followed
by PG-13 (28%). We had the least number of movies with rating NC-17.

Figure 3 Movie Ratings Distribution

**Description of the 5 categories of Ratings:**

  G -- General Audience                 All ages admitted.
  PG -- Parental Guidance Suggested     Some material may be inappropriate for children
  PG-13 -- Parents Strongly Cautioned   Some material may be inappropriate for children under 13
  R-Restricted                          Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian
  NC-17 -- Adults Only                  No One 17 and Under Admitted.

In rotten tomatoes few movies had multiple genres, for example, the
movie Knives out included Genres "Comedy, Drama, Mystery and Thriller,
Crime ".  With the movies having many Genres our dataset had different
combinations of unique Genres. In total, we had 154 unique Genres.
Figure 4 below shows the distribution of the top 10 genres in our
dataset. In our data, maximum number of movies had either had 1 or 2
genres, with action and adventure movies being maximum, followed by
drama, art, and comedy.

![Chart, pie chart Description automatically
generated](media/image3.png)

![Chart, bar chart Description automatically
generated](media/image15.png)

Figure 4: Top 10 Movie Genres

**Movie Directors Analysis**
----------------------------

Our dataset of 10000 movies had 6453 unique movie directors. We wanted
to check the distribution of the number of movies directed by each
director. Figure 5 below shows the top 20 directors based on the total
number of movies directed by each director. We see that the director
with the maximum number of movies is Tyler Perry who has directed 16
movies in total followed by Steven Soderbergh with 15 movies.


![Chart, bar chart Description automatically
generated](media/image5.png)

Figure 5: Top 20 movie directors

**Comparing audience score with critic score**
----------------------------------------------

There are many instances where audience reviews can be very different
from critic reviews. There are several blockbuster movies that have been
appreciated by audiences but not by critics. On the other hand, there
are quite a few art films that critics adored, but not audience. This
was clearly seen in rotten tomatoes.

The columns audience and critic score brackets are categorized based on
the scores. We have scores between 0 -100 with brackets as shown below:

-   \< 20 \-- worst

-   20 - 40 \-- below average

-   40 - 60 \-- average

-   60 - 80 -- best

-   80 -- 100 \-- good


![Chart, bar chart Description automatically
generated](media/image6.png)

Figure 6: Audience Score and Critic Score

Looking at figure 5 we can conclude that:

-   Movies rated with average score by audience have all 5 categories of
    critic score brackets with more than 50% of movies rated as good and
    best.

-   About 80% of the movies that were appreciated by audience as good
    movies are rated mostly as good or best by critics. The movies rated
    as best by audience are also rated as best or good by critics. We
    see that there is similarity of opinion here between audience and
    critics. These movies had similar audience score and critic score.

-   The movies that had worst audience score "less than 20" have critic
    score more than 60%, rated as good and best.

**Runtime trends over Release year brackets**
---------------------------------------------

Similar to bins created for audience score and critic score we have
created bins for the runtime and release years. We have 6 categories of
release years and 4 categories of runtimes.

Release Year

-   1920-1950 -- Black and White

-   1950-1980 -- Pretty old

-   1980-1990 -- year\_80\_90

-   1990-2000 -- year\_90\_2000

-   2000-2010 -- year 2000\_2010

-   2010-2020 -- year 2010\_2020

Runtime

-   10-90 -- Short\_till90

-   90-120 -- conventional\_90\_120

-   120-180 -- Lengthy\_120\_180

-   180-800 -- Superlengthy\_180\_800

Figure 7 below shows the distribution of the runtime of the movies over
the release years. Our dataset had maximum number of movies with release
years between the years 2010-2020 with most of them lasting for 120
minutes. The movies with runtime between 90-120 are most common in all
the release year brackets from 1920-2020


![Diagram Description automatically
generated](media/image7.png)

Fig 7: Runtimes over release years

**Text Analytics & Results**

1.  **Building Model**

After cleaning the text and performing exploratory analysis, our
approach was to build a content-based recommender system, that
recommends items based on the **similarity **between the content. To
find the similarity between the items we can use either Euclidean or
Cosine Similarity.


While cosine looks at the angle between vectors (thus not taking into
regard their weight or magnitude), Euclidean distance is like using a
ruler to measure the distance.

![Table Description automatically
generated](media/image8.png)

Figure 8: Euclidean and Cosine Similarity

In this project, we built a machine learning model based on cosine
similarity, which was done in the following steps:

**Combining Features**

We combined all the relevant features to a single feature. We combined
all the columns of final dataset and created a new column "combined" in
a new dataset. The column "combined" will contain useful features from
the respective rows in a combined single string.

**Vectorization**

The sklearn.feature\_extraction.text was used to extract features from
the data consisting text. We used TF-IDF Vectorizer and used the result
matrix to find the cosine similarity.

**Finding Similarity **

The linear\_kernel from sklearn.metrics was used to calculate the
similarity between the movies. The matrix obtained from the
linear\_kernel is an array with calculated similarity between the
movies. Figure 10 shows the cosine similarity matrix; the cosine
similarity of movie 0 with movie 0 is 1; they are 100% similar. This
suggests that every movie is similar to itself. The similarity between
movie 0 and movie 1 is 0.0103, similarity score = 0.0103



![Table Description automatically
generated](media/image9.png)

Figure 10: Cosine Similarity matrix

2.  **Get Recommendations**

The next step in our process is to recommend the similar movies to the
user, the input to this is the users' current selected movie. In order
to extract the recommendations, we add a count to the list of movies and
similarity scores sorted in descending.


Figure 11 shows sorted list of the movies in the descending order based
on the similarity score. The user input here is the movie 'mulan' which
is at index 2. The index 0 shows the similarity of the movie with
itself, followed by movies 3709, 411 etc. Later, these indexes are
replaced with the titles.


![Text Description automatically
generated](media/image10.png)

Figure 11: Similarity scores

To display the recommendations to the user we map the index number to
the movie name which are already sorted as in figure 11. Here we are
considering only the top 10 movies from the sorted list.

3.  **Results**

To test the model, we did few manual explorations by giving various
movies and inputs. Figure 12 shows the recommendations of the movies
"the lego movie 2: the second part"," get out" and "Knives out".

The Lego movie second part has movies suggested that very similar to the
input. All the movies suggested are animated movies, that have genres as
comedy, fantasy and kids adventure.

![A picture containing text Description automatically
generated](media/image11.png)
![Text Description automatically
generated](media/image12.png)

Figure 12(b & c): Results 2

The movie get out, which is a kind of horror and mystery film has
suggestions involving similar actors (movies of Daniel Kaluyya (Queen &
slim, chatroom) , Catherine Keener (Hamlet 2, the oranges, little pink
house) and few other horror and mystery movies like drag me to hell,
ready or not etc. Similarly, the movie Knives Out which is a drama,
mystery and thriller has recommendations of similar genre and cast
(Casino Royale of Daniel Craig, The night clerk of Anna De Armas).

Since we didn't have a definite metric to evaluate the recommendations,
we have manually explored the recommendations and ensured that the
recommendations were reliable which can be improved further by adding
metrics to evaluate accuracy of recommendations and increasing the data.

**Insights & Recommendations**

With our approach, we find the movie recommendation system can be easily
trained on new dataset and produce reasonable results thus making it
easily scalable. However, lack of evaluation method and humongous data
are the two biggest challenges of this project. Even the model can give
reasonable recommendation within dataset, it may not work on any other
random movie that comes from the outsides of our dataset. For feature
research, multiple models with different approach should be built. By
comparing our model with other models, we can have a sense of how good
this model is and how good the recommendations are.

To overcome data problems, we need to break the predictor features that
has large size into clusters and generate new categories to reduce the
size and duplicate of feature. Then applying TF-IDF approaches after
better data cleaning and feature engineering. We also need to think
about give a weight to every feature and reduce the impact of less
important feature on recommendation.

**References**

Zhuang, L., Jing, F., & Zhu, X. Y. (2006, November). Movie review mining
and summarization. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM international
conference on Information and knowledge management (pp. 43-50).

Understanding various attributes and measures of the movies
<https://www.rottentomatoes.com/about>

Frequency of watching or streaming movies among adults in the United
States in 2019 - 2020

[https://www.statista.com/statistics/935492/movies-watching-streaming-frequency-us/]{.underline}

[https://www.statista.com/statistics/187122/movie-releases-in-north-america-since-2001/]{.underline}

Movie Streaming more than ever -- importance of recommendation systems

<https://www.theverge.com/2020/3/27/21195358/streaming-netflix-disney-hbo-now-youtube-twitch-amazon-prime-video-coronavirus-broadband-network>

Content Based Recommendation systems and approaches

[[https://towardsdatascience.com/introduction-to-two-approaches-of-content-based-recommendation-system-fc797460c18c]{.underline}](https://towardsdatascience.com/introduction-to-two-approaches-of-content-based-recommendation-system-fc797460c18c)

Cosine Similarity -- Understanding how it works

[[https://www.machinelearningplus.com/nlp/cosine-similarity/]{.underline}](https://www.machinelearningplus.com/nlp/cosine-similarity/)

**Appendix**

GitHub repository link:
<https://github.com/aditya-karampudi/rotten_recommendation>

This link has the web scraping and model building python notebooks with
raw corpus, cleaned corpus data.

Python Model building notebook is attached in submission along with the
document.
